Change Behaviour Of Array Sort Functions To Return A Copy Of The Sorted Array
=============================================================================

:PHP-RFC: 0784
:Title: Change Behaviour Of Array Sort Functions To Return A Copy Of The Sorted Array
:Author: Gina Peter Banyard <girgias@php.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2024-10-20
:PHP-Version: 8.5
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

The PHP array sort functions take the array to sort as a by-reference
array to sort the array in place. However, since PHP 5.6 these function
have only ever returned ``true``. Moreover, it would only return
``false`` (or ``null``) prior to this version in case of a memory
allocation failure. This effectively means the return values of these
functions are useless. Similarly, ``array_walk()``,
``array_walk_recursive()``, and ``shuffle()`` have only ever returned
``true`` (or in case of type errors ``null`` or ``false`` which are
proper ``TypeError``\ s as of PHP 8.0) since at least PHP 5.3. One last
array function that now only returns ``true`` since PHP 8.0 is
``array_multisort()``, when all warnings and false returns were
converted to ``ValueError``\ s and ``TypeError``\ s.

This behaviour is annoying as it makes writing code in a functional way
more cumbersome and tedious. Indeed, when working with higher order
functions (e.g. ``array_map()``), one cannot just use these functions as
callbacks and must instead wrap them in a closure which returns the
sorted array.

Proposal
--------

Change the return value of:

-  ``sort()``
-  ``rsort()``
-  ``asort()``
-  ``arsort()``
-  ``ksort()``
-  ``krsort()``
-  ``natsort()``
-  ``natcasesort()``
-  ``usort()``
-  ``uasort()``
-  ``uksort()``
-  ``array_multisort()``
-  ``shuffle()``
-  ``array_walk()``
-  ``array_walk_recursive()``

from ``true`` to a copy of the ``array`` that is sorted, traversed, or
shuffled.

This operation is effectively "for free" as we just increment the
reference count of the sorted array by one.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

Sorting an empty array and checking the return value of one of the
``sort()`` functions would now be falsy rather than ``true``.

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

The sort methods from the SPL ``ArrayObject`` class are not affected by
this change.

Version
-------

Next minor version, PHP 8.5.

Vote
----

As per the voting RFC a yes/no vote with a 2/3 majority is needed for
this proposal to be accepted.

Voting started on 2024-XX-XX and will end on 2024-XX-XX.

Question: Accept Change behaviour of array sort functions to return a copy of the sorted array RFC?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

References
----------

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: TBD
:Original Authors: Gina Peter Banyard girgias@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.5
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: array-sort-return-array
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/array-sort-return-array
