Add File_descriptor() Function
==============================

:PHP-RFC: 0848
:Title: Add File_descriptor() Function
:Author: George Peter Banyard <girgias@php.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2023-01-16
:PHP-Version: 8.3
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

When dealing with I/O in PHP, one deals with streams as an abstraction
over the file system. This abstraction is convenient in giving a uniform
interface without needing to deal with the underlying system. However,
sometimes one needs to deal with the file system directly via the file
descriptor, for example when interacting with a USB device.

PHP supports retrieving the file descriptor of a stream within the
engine, but does not expose this capability to userland. However, with
the `magic of FFI <https://github.com/ppelisset/php-fileno>`__ it is
possible to expose the underlying file descriptor of a stream if it
exists, by stubbing out the Zend engine.

This RFC address this issue by proposing the addition of a native
``file_descriptor()`` function.

Proposal
--------

The proposal is to add the following function to PHP:

.. code:: php

   /** @param resource $stream */
   function file_descriptor($stream): int {}

Which returns the underlying file descriptor of a stream if it exists,
or throws a ``TypeError`` if the resource is not a stream or does not
have an underlying file descriptor.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

This RFC does not contain any backwards incompatible changes.

Proposed PHP Version
--------------------

Next minor version, i.e. PHP 8.3.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

As per the voting RFC a yes/no vote with a 2/3 majority is needed for
this proposal to be accepted.

Voting started on 2023-XX-XX and will end on 2023-XX-XX.

Question: Accept Add file_descriptor function RFC?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Implementation
--------------

GitHub pull request: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/10342

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

-  the version(s) it was merged into
-  a link to the git commit(s)
-  a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature

References
----------

| FFI implementation: https://github.com/ppelisset/php-fileno
| AFUP Forum PHP Talk (in French) describing the use case: `FFI : De
  nouveaux horizons pour PHP - Pierre PELISSET - Forum PHP
  2022 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oUtJrx0ElUc>`__

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/10342
:Original Authors: George Peter Banyard, girgias@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.3
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: file-descriptor-function
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/file-descriptor-function
