Add Http_(get|clear)_last_response_headers() Function
=====================================================

:PHP-RFC: 0863
:Title: Add Http_(get|clear)_last_response_headers() Function
:Author: Gina Peter Banyard <girgias@php.net>
:Status: Unknown
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2024-01-03
:PHP-Version: 8.4
:Version: 0.2

Introduction
------------

The
`$http_response_header <https://www.php.net/manual/en/reserved.variables.httpresponseheader.php>`__
variable is magically created in the local scope whenever an HTTP
request is performed through PHP's stream layer, i.e. when using the
`HTTP wrapper <https://www.php.net/manual/en/wrappers.http.php>`__. One
such usage is using ``file_get_contents()`` to retrieve the content of a
URL.

The
`$http_response_header <https://www.php.net/manual/en/reserved.variables.httpresponseheader.php>`__
variable will contain all the HTTP headers that were encountered during
the request performed via the HTTP wrapper.

All other features using this operating principle, such as
`$php_errormsg <https://www.php.net/manual/en/reserved.variables.phperrormsg.php>`__,
have been removed because creating a variable in the local scope is a
terrible way of returning additional information. This variable itself
was initially slated `to be deprecated in PHP
8.1 </rfc/deprecations_php_8_1#predefined_variable_http_response_header>`__,
but due to a lack of convenient alternatives, it was removed from the
proposal at that time.

This variable is created and populated even if the HTTP request fails, a
behaviour that requires dropping down to the stream layer, providing an
additional stream context to ignore errors. Subsequently, the user can
manually parse the response header and detect if the HTTP request failed
or not. This is impractical and a better interface would be simply
checking if the return value of the initial call was ``false``.

As a replacement, we propose adding functions similar to
``error_get_last()``/``error_clear_last()`` which replaced
`$php_errormsg <https://www.php.net/manual/en/reserved.variables.phperrormsg.php>`__.

Motivation
----------

The primary motivation for adding this function, is to be able to remove
the
`$http_response_header <https://www.php.net/manual/en/reserved.variables.httpresponseheader.php>`__
variable completely. To create this variable one needs to use the
``zend_set_local_var_str()`` engine function. This is also the last
usage of this engine function and its sibling function
``zend_set_local_var()``.

Moreover, this variable needs to be special cased in the optimizer/JIT
(via the ``HTTP_RESPONSE_HEADER_ALIAS`` enum case of
``zend_ssa_alias_kind``). Which means that any extension that would use
this engine API would misbehave under opcache.

See the `Backward Incompatible
Changes </rfc/http-last-response-headers#backward_incompatible_changes>`__
section for an impact analysis of the removal of this feature.

Proposal
--------

Add the following two functions:

-  ``function http_get_last_response_header(): ?array``
-  ``function http_clear_last_response_header(): void``

``http_get_last_response_header()`` would provide the same information
as
`$http_response_header <https://www.php.net/manual/en/reserved.variables.httpresponseheader.php>`__
if a request via the HTTP wrapper is made, and also return the headers
as an array even when the request fails. If no request via the HTTP
wrapper is made, or the last headers have been cleared by calling
``http_clear_last_response_header()``, then ``null`` is returned.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

As this RFC does not yet propose deprecating
`$http_response_header <https://www.php.net/manual/en/reserved.variables.httpresponseheader.php>`__
there are no backward incompatible changes.

Considering the possible simplification to the engine and the optimizer
by removing this last usage of the capability to create a variable in
this way, we have conducted a usage analysis of the feature. We found
only 65 usages in 30 projects across a sample of over 900 projects
(composer packages, standalone open source projects, and private
codebases) which were analyzed with `Exakat <https://www.exakat.io>`__.
[1] Most of those usages stem from packages like Guzzle or OAuth client
libraries.

It is impossible to polyfill this feature, however it is possible to
write cross version compatible code in the following way:

.. code:: php

   $content = file_get_contents('http://example.com/');
   if (function_exists('http_get_last_response_headers')) {
       $http_response_header = http_get_last_response_headers();
   }
   // Use $http_response_header as before

Considering the sparse usage of this feature, the possibility to write
cross version compatible code, and the possible engine and optimizer
simplifications, it seems reasonable to slate this feature for removal
even without a deprecation notice if the need arises.

Rejected ideas
--------------

One suggested idea was to provide those headers via a by-reference entry
to the stream context. This idea was rejected by us, and other members
of the PHP Foundation, as we wish to maintain stream contexts as a
stateless configuration data structure passed to the stream.

This one-to-one feature replacement does not prevent the introduction of
a more generic solution for other stream wrappers. And this pair of new
functions can always be slated for future deprecation and removal.

Version
-------

Next minor version, PHP 8.4.

Vote
----

As per the voting RFC a yes/no vote with a 2/3 majority is needed for
this proposal to be accepted.

Voting started on 2024-01-29 and will end on 2024-02-14.

Question: Accept Add http_(get|clear)_last_response_headers() function RFC?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

References
----------

[1] https://gist.github.com/exakat/454e503458e231dc0695837ad2561540

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/12500
:Original Authors: Gina Peter Banyard girgias@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.4
:Original Status: Pending Implementation
:Slug: http-last-response-headers
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/http-last-response-headers
