Promote The PHP Foundation
==========================

:PHP-RFC: 0888
:Title: Promote The PHP Foundation
:Author: Jim Winstead <jimw@php.net>
:Status: Active
:Type: Process
:Created: 2024-01-06
:Version: 0.9

Introduction
------------

`The PHP Foundation <https://thephp.foundation>`__ was created to
"support, advance, and develop the PHP Language" and currently funds a
team of ten developers to foster that goal. There is currently no
recognition of this work on the main PHP.net website.

Proposal
--------

This pull request is an example of how such recognition could be added:
https://github.com/php/web-php/pull/821

This is out of scope for the usual RFC process, but because there is no
real formal process around the community governance of the PHP project,
it was suggested that discussing this on internals@ and putting it
through the RFC process would be the best way to seek community approval
for this.

Unaffected PHP Functionality
----------------------------

This does not impact the functionality of PHP at all.

Future Scope
------------

Further discussion has been had about doing more to re-align the
non-technical aspects of PHP community management under the auspices of
the PHP Foundation. This is not that proposal, this is just about
approving this pull request (or something similar in form).

Voting Choices
--------------

2/3rds majority required. Voting runs until January 31st, 2024, 00:00
UTC.

Question: Should we place text and a link to the PHP Foundation on PHP.net to promote them as a financial sponsor of the project?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  yes
-  no

References
----------

This was discussed on the internals@ mailing list here:
https://externals.io/message/121861

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Jim Winstead, jimw@php.net
:Original Status: Voting
:Slug: promote_php_foundation
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/promote_php_foundation
