Straw Poll: How To Name The Process Resource After It Is Converted To An Object
===============================================================================

:PHP-RFC: 0890
:Title: Straw Poll: How To Name The Process Resource After It Is Converted To An Object
:Author: Máté Kocsis <kocsismate@php.net>
:Status: Voting
:Type: Informational
:Created: 2023-10-19
:Version: 1.0

Introduction
------------

Since PHP 8.0, PHP resources are actively converted to "opaque" objects
as part of the https://github.com/php/php-tasks/issues/6 project. After
a two-year pause, new resources will be affected for PHP 8.4: most
importantly, the "Process" resource returned by ``proc_open()``.
However, a naming debate started during its migration.

Originally, the implementation used the ``Process`` class name, then
various other suggestions were received `in the mail
thread <https://externals.io/message/121164>`__ and privately as well:
``OS\Process``, ``Proc``, ``ProcessHandle``. As none of the names appear
to have a consensus, I decided to create a straw poll.

Discussion
----------

Process
~~~~~~~

The most straightforward and clearest name, since this is also how the
respective resource is called. On the other hand, the name might clash
with userspace class names, although it should be mentioned that the
global namespace is reserved for PHP itself.

Proc
~~~~

This name is consistent with the name of the related functions. However,
according to the `Class Naming </rfc/class-naming>`__ RFC, abbreviations
should be avoided where possible, and this is clearly a case, when an
abbreviation is not necessary. Thus, this option is not proposed for the
vote.

ProcessHandle
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This name is a good compromise between clarity and addressing the
backward compatibility concerns. Using the ``Handle`` postfix is not
without precedent, as there are already some classes with a similar name
which were introduced lately: ``CurlHandle``, ``CurlMultiHandle``, and
``CurlShareHandle``.

OS\Process
~~~~~~~~~~

Using the ``OS`` namespace would mitigate any possible backward
compatibility concerns. On the other hand, the ``OS`` namespace would
have no other symbols besides ``Process``, and as far as I know,
currently there is no plan to add anything into it.

Vote
----

This is a ranked-choice poll (following
`STV <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_transferable_vote#Example>`__)
between the naming alternatives. Vote starts on 2023-10-24 18:00:00 UTC
and ends on 2023-11-07 18:00:00 UTC.

First choice
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: How to name the Process resource (first choice)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Process
-  ProcessHandle
-  OS\Process

Second choice
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: How to name the Process resource (second choice)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-1:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Process
-  ProcessHandle
-  OS\Process

Third choice
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: How to name the Process resource (third choice)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _voting-choices-2:

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Process
-  ProcessHandle
-  OS\Process

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/12098/
:Original Authors: Máté Kocsis kocsismate@php.net
:Slug: process_object_name
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/process_object_name
