Static Class
============

:PHP-RFC: 0892
:Title: Static Class
:Author: Paul Morris <bilge@scriptfusion.com>
:Status: Declined
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2024-06-23
:PHP-Version: 8.4
:Version: 1.4

Introduction
------------

A static class is a class that cannot be instantiated, and whose members
(properties and methods) are all static. Implicit static classes can be
created today, by simply only including static members. However,
explicitly marking a class as static has several advantages:

-  Clear expression of developer intent.
-  Language-level compile-time checks to verify no instance members are
   included anywhere in the inheritance chain.
-  Language-level runtime checks to verify the class is never
   instantiated by any mechanism.

Of these advantages, the first can be somewhat mitigated with a
`userland
trait <https://github.com/ScriptFUSION/StaticClass/blob/master/src/StaticClass.php>`__,
but as such traits are non-standard, there is no consistent way to
identify them between projects. The ``static`` keyword is a consistent
way to identify static classes that could also be leveraged by static
analysis and code-completion tooling. Equally importantly, the
language-level checks cannot be replicated in userland, thus are better
suited for inclusion in PHP. In particular, classes with a private
constructor can still be instantiated via reflection and
faux-deserialization hacks.

Proposal
--------

A *static class* is so marked with the existing ``static`` keyword,
adjacent to the class declaration.

.. code:: php

   static class Foo {}

We introduce the ``static`` keyword at the class level to preclude the
need to create a private constructor. That is,
``function __construct()`` is a compile-time error in a static class.
Furthermore, attempting to instantiate a static by any means, whether
with the ``new`` keyword, ``ReflectionClass::newInstance*`` methods or
``unserialize()`` hacks, is strictly forbidden and will result in a
runtime error.

Whilst the goals of this RFC so expressed are fairly straightforward, we
acknowledge there are many finer points to consider. In particular:

#. Should a static class imply ``final`` (as in C#)?
#. Should a static class prohibit inheritance (as in C#)?
#. Should a static class permit state?
#. Should traits be permitted in a static class?
#. Can a static class be marked abstract?
#. Which magic methods should be supported?

To answer these questions, we consider the principal reason to mark a
class static is to move from an implicit declaration to the explicit.
Ergo, any decision precluding the developer from doing so is invalid,
since it coerces them to avoid explicit static, defeating its purpose.
Thus we derive the following razor:

   We cannot remove features from a static class that would otherwise be
   present in a standard class.

Following this razor we arrive at the following design.

#. A static class may be marked ``final``, but in the absence of such a
   mark, may still be extended.
#. A static class may extend other static classes, provided the parents
   are also marked ``static``.
#. A static class may have static properties.
#. A static class may use traits, provided they introduce no instance
   members.
#. A static class may be marked abstract, since abstract static
   functions already exist in PHP.
#. All static magic methods must be supported, i.e. just
   ``__callStatic()``.

Static keyword for class members
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One question our razor cannot answer is whether static member
declarations still require the ``static`` keyword in a static class.

Marking a class ``readonly`` makes marking properties with the same
*optional*, thus one might argue ``static`` should follow suit. However,
I opine it should not. Unlike ``readonly``, which typically applies to
properties declared near the head of the class (by convention) where the
same modifier is also applied, static members appear throughout the full
length of the class body. That is, it should be apparent when jumping
anywhere into a static class that its members are static, without having
to check the class declaration. Therefore this RFC still requires the
``static`` modifier for all members regardless of whether the class is
also marked ``static``, to prevent them appearing as instance members.
Aside, this is commensurate with the C# approach.

Mutually exclusive modifiers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When ``static`` is applied to a class, the following other class-level
modifiers become invalid and will raise compile-time errors.

-  ``readonly`` — Read-only properties are only supported for instance
   properties, but instance properties are forbidden by ``static``.

Inheritance
~~~~~~~~~~~

-  A static class only permits extending a parent class that is also
   marked ``static``.
-  A non-static class cannot extend a static class.
-  A static class can inherit from an abstract class, provided it is
   also marked ``static``.

Anonymous classes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Anonymous classes are always instantiated and thus at odds with the
concept of a static class. That is, the notion of an *anonymous static
class* is inherently invalid and not supported.

Dynamic properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Undeclared object properties can be added *dynamically* to object
instances, but since static classes cannot be instantiated, there is
nothing to attach such properties to. Static properties must always be
declared explicitly.

Reflection extensions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A new ``ReflectionClass::isStatic`` method will be added, returning
``true`` when the class is so marked, otherwise ``false``.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None known.

Future Scope
------------

These are some possible future extensions, but we don't necessarily
endorse them.

#. As noted in `Readonly properties
   2.0 <readonly_properties_v2#restrictions>`__, read-only static
   properties are not supported due to a technical limitation. If that
   limitation should ever be lifted, we could revisit lifting the
   restriction on mutual exclusivity with the ``readonly`` modifier.
#. Static interfaces may be introduced later if there is such a demand.
#. Static traits may be introduced later if there is such a demand.

Vote
----

As per the `voting RFC <RFC/voting#required_majority>`__ a yes/no vote
with a 2/3 majority is needed for this proposal to be accepted.

Voting started on 2024-07-15 and ended on 2024-08-09 at 21:00 UTC.

Question: Implement static classes as described?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Discussion
----------

Though this is a fairly straightforward RFC, it is not without its
detractors. Some view static classes as an anti-pattern; a namespace
cheat that should instead be presented as namespaced functions
(sans-class wrapper). That goes double for static classes including
state, where static properties can be viewed as equivalent to global
state, which is widely regarded as an anti-pattern. However, this RFC is
*not* encouraging any particular patterns. On the contrary, we are
merely returning a small but nevertheless useful tool to the developer's
toolkit that could have been available since classes were introduced. In
this humble author's opinion, static classes *should* just be a
collection of pure functions, but as defined by our opening razor, we
will *not* remove features from a static class that exist in a
non-static class because we do not have the liberty of designing a new
language, we're designing PHP, with all the weight of its past carried
forward. Anyone wishing to remove features from PHP can submit a
separate RFC, or perhaps more practically, just add a check to their
favourite code style tool.

Some regard namespaced functions as the correct way to implement static
classes. That is, a file of floating functions under a namespace, as in
`Amp <https://github.com/amphp/amp/blob/138801fb68cfc9c329da8a7b39d01ce7291ee4b0/src/functions.php>`__.
This author requested comments that would speak to any technical or
philosophical reason for why this would be strictly better than a static
class, but the only technical argument fielded was that classes can be
autoloaded and functions cannot. Curiously, this fact only speaks *in
favour* of static classes. One might argue this difference is negligible
thanks to Composer; files of functions can be loaded by Composer, but in
this case the file is *always* loaded, not *auto*\ loaded. Still, this
could be splitting hairs since opcache presumably trivializes this
difference. Interestingly, the current Amp maintainers commented that
namespaced functions were something they inherited, and if they had to
do it all over again, would probably elect for static classes. Thus we
conclude those preferring one style over the other do so purely out of
personal preference and not because one is technically nor even
philosophically superior.

Most importantly, this proposal does nothing to promote any patterns or
practices not already possible, nor does it block or inhibit development
of orthogonal approaches, such as autoloading of namespaced functions,
which some may regard as equivalent.

In the wild
-----------

Today, implicit static classes are all around us, in proprietary
projects and some of the largest open source projects in the world,
often called *utils* or *helpers*, all of these classes would benefit
from being explicitly marked static. To name a few:

-  PHPUnit

   -  Almost everything under
      `Util <https://github.com/sebastianbergmann/phpunit/tree/10.5/src/Util>`__
      including:

      -  `Color <https://github.com/sebastianbergmann/phpunit/blob/10.5/src/Util/Color.php>`__
      -  `Exporter <https://github.com/sebastianbergmann/phpunit/blob/10.5/src/Util/Exporter.php>`__
      -  `Filesystem <https://github.com/sebastianbergmann/phpunit/blob/10.5/src/Util/Filesystem.php>`__
      -  `GlobalState <https://github.com/sebastianbergmann/phpunit/blob/10.5/src/Util/GlobalState.php>`__
      -  `Json <https://github.com/sebastianbergmann/phpunit/blob/10.5/src/Util/Json.php>`__
      -  `Reflection <https://github.com/sebastianbergmann/phpunit/blob/10.5/src/Util/Reflection.php>`__

   -  Interestingly,
      `Assert <https://github.com/sebastianbergmann/phpunit/blob/10.5/src/Framework/Assert.php>`__
      would *not* be a static class because, despite being filled
      entirely with static methods, is intended to be extended by test
      class instances. In a (future) static class world, the absence of
      the ``static`` modifier would more clearly communicate this
      intent.

-  Symfony

   -  `BinaryUtil <https://github.com/symfony/symfony/blob/1a16ebc32598faada074e0af12a6a698d2964a5e/src/Symfony/Component/Uid/BinaryUtil.php#L47>`__
   -  `FormUtil <https://github.com/symfony/symfony/blob/1a16ebc32598faada074e0af12a6a698d2964a5e/src/Symfony/Component/Form/Util/FormUtil.php#L33>`__
   -  Almost everything under
      `VarDumper/Caster <https://github.com/symfony/symfony/tree/1a16ebc32598faada074e0af12a6a698d2964a5e/src/Symfony/Component/VarDumper/Caster>`__

-  Laravel – half this framework appears to be static, though fewer
   classes qualify as pure static, including:

   -  Several classes under
      `Support <https://github.com/laravel/framework/tree/f5f9383af919ef74b00eacb23b4a88fcf390743c/src/Illuminate/Support>`__
      including:

      -  `Env <https://github.com/laravel/framework/blob/f5f9383af919ef74b00eacb23b4a88fcf390743c/src/Illuminate/Support/Env.php>`__
      -  `Pluralizer <https://github.com/laravel/framework/blob/f5f9383af919ef74b00eacb23b4a88fcf390743c/src/Illuminate/Support/Pluralizer.php>`__
      -  `Reflector <https://github.com/laravel/framework/blob/f5f9383af919ef74b00eacb23b4a88fcf390743c/src/Illuminate/Support/Reflector.php>`__

   -  Literally everything under
      `Facades <https://github.com/laravel/framework/tree/11.x/src/Illuminate/Support/Facades>`__

References
----------

-  Discussion threads

   -  `This RFC <https://externals.io/message/123769>`__ (Bilge, June
      23, 2024).
   -  `Initial proposal <https://externals.io/message/123611>`__ (Bilge,
      June 15, 2024).
   -  `Prior proposal <https://externals.io/message/121717>`__ (Lanre
      Waju, November 19, 2023).

-  Archaic discussion threads

   -  `[VOTE] Abstract final / Static
      classes <https://externals.io/message/79601>`__ (Guilherme Blanco,
      December 12, 2014)
   -  `[RFC] Static classes (Was Abstract final
      classes) <https://externals.io/message/79338>`__ (Robert Stoll,
      December 1, 2014)
   -  `[RFC] Abstract final
      classes <https://externals.io/message/79211>`__ (Guilherme Blanco,
      November 27, 2014)

-  Similar RFCs

   -  `RFC: Static classes <rfc/abstract_final_class>`__ (Guilherme
      Blanco, November 26, 2014)
   -  `RFC: Static classes for PHP <rfc/static-classes>`__ (Lars
      Strojny, May 3, 2008)

-  `Static Classes and Static Class Members (C# Programming
   Guide) <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/classes-and-structs/static-classes-and-static-class-members>`__

Rejected Features
-----------------

Forbidding static class type declarations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It should be regarded as an error to use a static class as a type
declaration, since they cannot be instantiated and thus the requirement
can never be fulfilled by a matching instance. However, it is not
technically possible to forbid such declarations within PHP itself
because type checking is done when an instance is passed at runtime (and
we can never have such an instance). The engine does not support type
checking at compile time for function/method signatures. Such a check
would be a good candidate for third party static analysers instead.

Special thanks
--------------

I would feel remiss not to give thanks to the following list
contributors whose high quality feedback made significant contributions
to this RFC.

-  Mike Schinkel
-  Alexandru Pătrănescu
-  Claude Pache
-  Everyone else who engaged with this proposal.

Thank you!

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/14861
:Original Authors: Paul Morris bilge@scriptfusion.com
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.4
:Original Status: Voting
:Slug: static_class
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/static_class
