Warn On Conversions From Resource To String
===========================================

:PHP-RFC: 0910
:Title: Warn On Conversions From Resource To String
:Author: Gina Peter Banyard <girgias@php.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2024-09-24
:PHP-Version: 8.5
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

PHP has a history of performing various forms of type conversions. While
most dubious cases of such conversions nowadays throw a ``TypeError``,
or at least emit an ``E_WARNING``, the conversion of resources to
strings does none of these things.

As a consequence it is possible to concatenate a resource with a string
without any errors, but performing any sort of arithmetics with it
throws a ``TypeError``:

.. code:: php

   <?php

   var_dump(STDERR . 'hello');
   var_dump(STDERR + 10);

   ?>

will result in:

::

   string(19) "Resource id #3hello"

   Fatal error: Uncaught TypeError: Unsupported operand types: resource + int in FILE

This is surprising behaviour, especially as a non-stringable object
being used with the concatenation operator would throw an ``Error``.

Considering that resources are being phased out in favour of opaque
objects and do not support being converted to strings. We propose to
align the behaviour with that of converting an ``array`` to ``string``,
which is to emit a warning on implicit *and* explicit conversions.

Proposal
--------

Emit an ``E_WARNING`` when a conversion from ``resource`` to ``string``
occurs. Some common situations where this can occur:

-  String concatenation
-  String interpolation
-  ``echo``
-  ``(string)`` cast

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

As warnings could be promoted to an exception via an error handler, this
may result in exceptions being thrown in place where none previously
could.

Version
-------

Next minor version, PHP 8.5.

Vote
----

As per the voting RFC a yes/no vote with a 2/3 majority is needed for
this proposal to be accepted.

Voting started on 2024-XX-XX and will end on 2024-XX-XX.

Question: Accept Warn on conversions from resource to string RFC?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Voting Choices
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

-  Yes
-  No

Future scope
------------

-  Promote warning to a ``TypeError``

References
----------

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Implementation: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/16022
:Original Authors: Gina Peter Banyard girgias@php.net
:Original PHP Version: PHP 8.5
:Original Status: Under Discussion
:Slug: warn-resource-to-string
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/warn-resource-to-string
