Add Yescrypt Support To Crypt() And Password_*()
================================================

:PHP-RFC: 0914
:Title: Add Yescrypt Support To Crypt() And Password_*()
:Author: Niels Dossche <nielsdos@php.net>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Unknown
:Created: 2024-11-09
:Version: 0.1

Introduction
------------

The elevator pitch for the RFC. The first paragraph of this section will
be slightly larger to give it emphasis; please write a good
introduction.

Proposal
--------

All the features and examples of the proposal.

To `paraphrase Zeev
Suraski <http://news.php.net/php.internals/66051>`__, explain hows the
proposal brings substantial value to be considered for inclusion in one
of the world's most popular programming languages.

Remember that the RFC contents should be easily reusable in the PHP
Documentation.

If applicable, you may wish to use the language specification as a
reference.

Backward Incompatible Changes
-----------------------------

None.

Proposed PHP Version(s)
-----------------------

Next PHP 8.x, i.e. PHP 8.5 at time of writing.

New Constants
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Describe any new constants so they can be accurately and comprehensively
explained in the PHP documentation.

Open Issues
-----------

None yet.

Future Scope
------------

None yet.

Proposed Voting Choices
-----------------------

Include these so readers know where you are heading and can discuss the
proposed voting options.

Patches and Tests
-----------------

PoC PR: https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/16452

Implementation
--------------

After the project is implemented, this section should contain

#. the version(s) it was merged into
#. a link to the git commit(s)
#. a link to the PHP manual entry for the feature
#. a link to the language specification section (if any)

References
----------

Links to external references, discussions or RFCs

Rejected Features
-----------------

None yet.

Additional Metadata
-------------------

:Original Authors: Niels Dossche nielsdos@php.net
:Slug: yescrypt
:Wiki URL: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/yescrypt
