====== Request for Comments: Strict Sessions ======
  * Version: 0.1
  * Date: 2011-11-23
  * Author: Yasuo Ohgaki <yohgaki@ohgaki.net>
  * Status: Draft
  * First Published at: https://wiki.php.net/rfc/strict_sessions


===== Introduction =====

https://gist.github.com/1379668

This patch adds
 - validate_sid() to ps_modules (Save handlers)
 - use_strict_session to php.ini (On by default, off for old behavior)
 - display that save handler supports strict session or not via
phpinfo() (So that user could know behavior)
 - update PHP_SESSION_API version (So that save handler authors could
write portable code)

Compatibility issues are
 - save handlers that are currently working should also work with this
patch, except ps modules using PS_MOD_SID and PS_MOD_FUNCS_SID macro.
These ps modules should implement validate_sid(). Modules that are
using PS_MOD/PS_FUNCS are not affected, they just marked as "adaptive"
module. (e.g. pecl sqlite's ps module. You can see it via phpinfo())
   NOTE: PS_MOD_SID() and PS_MOD_FUNCS_SID() are already defined, but
it was the same as PS_MOD()/PS_MOD_FUNCS(). If old ps_module does not
compile, just remove "_SID" from  PS_MOD_SID()/PS_MOD_FUNCS_SID().
 - session ID string is checked so that chars are alphanumeric + ','
'-' when use_strict_session=On.
  (mod_file.c checks session ID this way w/o this patch to prevent
problems. Using restrictive session ID string is better for other ps
modules. IMHO)
 - session read failure is not rescued to eliminate possible infinite
loops. Bundled ps modules were not using this at least.

You will see some tests are failing since they depend on adaptive
session. By looking into failing test results, you can see this patch
is generating new session ID if it's not a already initialized
session. I'll modify these tests (set use_strict_session=Off) and add
some tests for new feature (new validate_sid() function for user and
use_class save handler) after commit.

It removes session read failure retry code from
php_session_initialize() . The retry code may cause infinite loop
depending on save handler implementation. Some session save handlers
may be using this to prevent adoption(?), but they should implement
validate_sid() to prevent adoption from now on. With new code, there
will never be infinite loops. Currently bundled save handlers are not
using this feature.

If there is no objection, I'll commit it to trunk.
It will save much time if I don't have to write wiki for rfc.

==== Related Discussions ====
http://www.mail-archive.com/internals@lists.php.net/msg54147.html

===== Changelog =====
2011-11-23 - 0.1 - just dumping the info from the original mail 
